# About the Feral File App Security

The Feral File app secures your sensitive data, such as cryptographic seeds and private keys, on your closely held mobile device. It ensures your data's protection by following Apple's best security practices: Feral File stores your keys in the iPhone Keychain, which encrypts them on disk using AES-256 (with the encryption key stored in your iPhone's Secure Enclave). They can only be retrieved through the Feral File app “After First Unlock”. In order to access the Feral File app, you must supply your personal identification, usually Face ID or Touch ID but possibly a PIN, depending on your iPhone model.

Feral File wants your data to be not just secure, but also resilient. To make it much harder for you to lose your  keys, Feral File utilizes the iCloud Keychain service, which synchronizes your Keychain content to your iCloud account, allowing access from your other devices logged into the iCloud. You must have "iCloud Backup" set to "On" and "Keychain" set to "On" in your iPhone Settings. You can even synchronize your keys to a new iPhone if you lose your current one. (Other data can also be backed up with the Feral File subscription.)

Though your Keychain is synced to the iCloud, it is still accessible only to you, thanks to Apple's use of industry best-practice end-to-end encryption, again built on AES-256. Because your Keychain is encrypted before it reaches the cloud, no one else ever has access to it, not Apple and not Bitmark. If you ever want to sync it to a new device, that requires not just the authentication information for your iCloud account, but also knowledge of one of the PINs or passwords for one of your devices.

Of course all security ultimately rests on the code, and whether it makes the proper use of all of these best practices. This is why the Feral File app is open source. We believe in trust through transparency. We invite you to [review and use our code](https://github.com/bitmark-inc/feralfile-app).
